I have worked with Jakub in Webinterpret, first as collaborators on an
analytics project, then I mentored him, to finally work together in a Python
Backend team for about a year and a half. Then, we created A Python discussion
and collaboration group and have kept in touch ever since. I feel confident I
know Jakub well and want to vouch for him strongly.

Jakub is a versatile programmer, besides being a Python programmer on a broad
stack of technologies, he has in-depth, detailed knowledge about Linux and GNU
tool set. Our team worked on a big-data on-line auctions translation system,
where we built micro-services based on Pyramid and queue systems to handle
hundreds of thousands of items per week on a hundred-ish strong farm of
servers. We reviewed each other's code, discussed code quality strategies, data
flows and learned from each other about Linux and tools.

I most value Jakub for his conscientiousness. The day we met, he knew next to
nothing about Linux and Python but was open to hear more and try. He picked up
Linux and decided to master it, learned it in-depth, part by part, up to a
level where he can offer meaningful opinions and contributions to the team. He
learned Python quickly and contributed very sensible code, well tested, without
bloat or show-off tricks, well formatted and atomically divided into git
commits with actually useful descriptions. When Jakub picks up a technology,
having decided that it's actually useful to learn, he means to be able to
provide useful results and these require expert attention. I believe Jakub is
an expert in many technologies he acquired. He also stayed humble while
progressing.

Some years after we parted ways, I inherited his code base in a company and was
impressed with the work he'd done there. The code was clean, readable,
documented in strategic places, he left the project in a useful, pleasant
state, this is rare. That occasion also highlighted another trait of Jakub -
the unconditional commitment to his code, as hyperbolic as it sounds, Jakub
treats his code as his mark, his brand and whether his manager or seniors
revise the code or not, the quality must be there. This creates trust, let him
do his thing and you will get his best.

Jakub has high introspection and focuses on personal development. He studies
foreign languages and is open to new experiences. This makes him fun to be
around for like-minded people. He is ambitious and thinks broadly. You can
probably have a conversation with him about most topics in our industry, where
he will both listen attentively and offer his insights.

To balance, I'd like to offer critique and suggestions for his development. I'd
like to suggest Jakub focuses more on sharing his knowledge via blog posts and
open source. Also, he is sometimes a perfectionist and can be tense in
defending good solutions. While this is mostly useful, I feel Jakub will
benefit from taking a more relaxed approach to code and focus on his emotional
comfort sometimes to have a long career without burning out.

I hope Jakub goes into mentor or management positions when he feels ready. I
can trust him with coding just about anything and feel soon he will outgrow the
role of a programmer.

Reach me via my personal e-mail bartek.rychlicki@gmail.com if you want to have
a private chat about Jakub.

